Restructuring vector search docs and adding vector landing page and use cases page (#5567)
elastic/docs-content: solutions/search/vector.md

| [`sparse_vector`](elasticsearch://reference/elasticsearch/mapping-reference/sparse-vector.md) | Sparse vectors  | [`sparse_vector`](elasticsearch://reference/query-languages/query-dsl/query-dsl-sparse-vector-query.md)                          | Semantic term expansion using the ELSER model                |
| [`semantic_text`](elasticsearch://reference/elasticsearch/mapping-reference/semantic-text.md) | Sparse or dense | [`match`](elasticsearch://reference/query-languages/query-dsl/query-dsl-match-query.md), [`knn`](elasticsearch://reference/query-languages/query-dsl/query-dsl-knn-query.md#knn-query-with-semantic-text), [`sparse_vector`](elasticsearch://reference/query-languages/query-dsl/query-dsl-sparse-vector-query.md#example-query-on-a-semantic_text-field), [`semantic`](elasticsearch://reference/query-languages/query-dsl/query-dsl-semantic-query.md) | Managed semantic search, agnostic to implementation details. |

> You can combine different search strategies by using [Retrievers](retrievers-overview.md). Compose multi-stage retrieval pipelines that combine different search strategies in a single request.

Reviewer: You can also use ESQL nowadays for many more [search techniques](https://www.elastic.co/docs/solutions/search/esql-for-search) so this should probably be updated

WDYT @Mikep86?

Reviewer 2: It's true that you can use ES|QL to search vector fields as well. However, it's a completely different query language with its own methods and functions. This section is currently focused on Query DSL, and I have some concerns that just linking to ES|QL without establishing that it is a different language, and how the queries described here map to it, could be confusing.

Some ideas on how to handle this:

- **Have a second section for ES|QL**: Basically replicate this section, but describe the methods/functions you would use in ES|QL
- **Add a column for ES|QL methods/functions**: Add a column to the table above for ES|QL methods/functions.

I'm leaning towards the latter to reduce duplication.

I think it's also important to describe how to effectively use retrievers and ES|QL to combine search strategies. Simply saying you can, then linking to the overview page, doesn't provide a lot of actionable guidance.

Maybe a structure like this would work?

```
## Field types and queries [vector-queries-and-field-types]

<field type table>

... You can also combine search strategies using retrievers or ES|QL ...

### Combining search strategies using retrievers

<high-level description of strategies, describe the value of hybrid search. Deep link to particular retrievers that help combine strategies, like rrf/linear.>

### Combining search strategies using ES|QL

<high-level description of strategies, reiterate the value of hybrid search. Deep link to fork/fuse>>
```

The goal isn't to duplicate what is already documented in the retriever/ES|QL sections, but to introduce it in the context of vector search. 

WDYT?

Reviewer: for sure ESQL needs to be treated as a first-class citizen

sidebar: we need to tell a better story in the docs about choosing between (and combining) DSL / ESQL / retrievers

Author: Thanks for the feedback, @Mikep86! I added a new column for ES|QL and two new sections: one for retrievers and one for ES|QL. Please let me know if they look technically correct.

# Vector search in {{es}}

:::{tip}
New to vector search? Start with this [vector search quick start](get-started/semantic-search.md).

For common vector search use cases and how to apply them, refer to [Vector search use cases](vector/vector-search-use-cases.md).
:::

Vector search finds results based on _meaning_ rather than exact keyword matches. {{es}} functions as a [vector database](#vector-database): it stores embeddings at scale and retrieves by similarity while combining that with full-text search, filters, and aggregations in one engine. This page explains the core concepts and terminology you need before working with vector search in {{es}}. 

## Core concepts [vectors-and-embeddings]

$$$vector-database$$$ Vector database

> :   A system designed to store vector embeddings at scale and retrieve the most similar vectors to a query embedding, typically using approximate or exact k-nearest neighbor (kNN) search. {{es}} acts as a vector database when you store embeddings in [`dense_vector`](vector/dense-vector.md) or [`sparse_vector`](vector/sparse-vector.md) fields and query them for similarity. {{es}} can combine vector search with full-text search, structured filters, aggregations, and hybrid retrieval in one engine, so you can keep lexical, semantic, and operational queries on the same data and infrastructure.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
:   A system designed to store vector embeddings at scale and retrieve the most similar vectors to a query embedding, typically using approximate or exact k-nearest neighbor (kNN) search. {{es}} functions as a vector database when you store embeddings in [`dense_vector`](vector/dense-vector.md) or [`sparse_vector`](vector/sparse-vector.md) fields and query them for similarity. {{es}} can combine vector search with full-text search, structured filters, aggregations, and hybrid retrieval in one engine, so you can keep lexical, semantic, and operational queries on the same data and infrastructure.
```

$$$dense-vectors$$$ Dense vectors
:   Fixed-length arrays where every element has a value. They are produced by neural embedding models that learn to map content into a continuous space. Dense vectors capture overall semantic meaning and work well for natural language understanding, multilingual content, and rich semantic matching. They typically have hundreds or thousands of dimensions.

    In {{es}}, dense vectors use the [`dense_vector`](vector/dense-vector.md) field type and are queried with the [`knn`](vector/knn.md) query. You can deploy external or hosted embedding models, or [bring your own pre-computed vectors](vector/bring-own-vectors.md).

$$$sparse-vectors$$$ Sparse vectors
:   Arrays where most elements are zero. Only a small number of dimensions carry meaningful values, each corresponding to a specific term or concept. Sparse vectors are often used for lexical-style matching with semantic expansion: content is expanded into weighted terms that capture related concepts. Results tend to be more explainable because you can see which terms contributed to the match.

>     In {{es}}, sparse vectors are generated by the [ELSER](/explore-analyze/machine-learning/nlp/ml-nlp-elser.md) (Elastic Learned Sparse Encoder) model and use the [`sparse_vector`](vector/sparse-vector.md) field type. ELSER is built-in and requires no external model deployment.

Reviewer: isn't Jina the default nowadays?

Author: As far as I know, Jina generates dense vectors only, and ELSER is the one that generates sparse vectors.

Reviewer: ah yes!

| [`sparse_vector`](elasticsearch://reference/elasticsearch/mapping-reference/sparse-vector.md) | Sparse vectors | [`sparse_vector`](elasticsearch://reference/query-languages/query-dsl/query-dsl-sparse-vector-query.md) | No {{esql}} search function targets the field. |

> | [`semantic_text`](elasticsearch://reference/elasticsearch/mapping-reference/semantic-text.md) | Sparse or dense | [`match`](elasticsearch://reference/query-languages/query-dsl/query-dsl-match-query.md), [`knn`](elasticsearch://reference/query-languages/query-dsl/query-dsl-knn-query.md#knn-query-with-semantic-text), [`sparse_vector`](elasticsearch://reference/query-languages/query-dsl/query-dsl-sparse-vector-query.md#example-query-on-a-semantic_text-field), [`semantic`](elasticsearch://reference/query-languages/query-dsl/query-dsl-semantic-query.md) | - Find similar documents using [`KNN`](elasticsearch://reference/query-languages/esql/functions-operators/dense-vector-functions/knn.md), [`MATCH`](elasticsearch://reference/query-languages/esql/functions-operators/search-functions/match.md) and the [match operator (:)](elasticsearch://reference/query-languages/esql/functions-operators/operators.md#esql-match-operator) <br>- When both sides are `dense_vector` values in the query, compare them using [`V_COSINE`](elasticsearch://reference/query-languages/esql/functions-operators/dense-vector-functions/v_cosine.md), [`V_DOT_PRODUCT`](elasticsearch://reference/query-languages/esql/functions-operators/dense-vector-functions/v_dot_product.md), [`V_HAMMING`](elasticsearch://reference/query-languages/esql/functions-operators/dense-vector-functions/v_hamming.md), [`V_L1_NORM`](elasticsearch://reference/query-languages/esql/functions-operators/dense-vector-functions/v_l1_norm.md), and [`V_L2_NORM`](elasticsearch://reference/query-languages/esql/functions-operators/dense-vector-functions/v_l2_norm.md) |

Reviewer 2: This looks much better! I suggest we bring in someone more familiar with ES|QL to evaluate the technical details though.

    In {{es}}, dense vectors use the [`dense_vector`](vector/dense-vector.md) field type and are queried with the [`knn`](vector/knn.md) query. You can deploy external or hosted embedding models, or [bring your own pre-computed vectors](vector/bring-own-vectors.md).

$$$sparse-vectors$$$ Sparse vectors
:   Arrays where most elements are zero. Only a small number of dimensions carry meaningful values, each corresponding to a specific term or concept. Sparse vectors are often used for lexical-style matching with semantic expansion: content is expanded into weighted terms that capture related concepts. Results tend to be more explainable because you can see which terms contributed to the match.

    In {{es}}, sparse vectors are generated by the [ELSER](/explore-analyze/machine-learning/nlp/ml-nlp-elser.md) (Elastic Learned Sparse Encoder) model and use the [`sparse_vector`](vector/sparse-vector.md) field type. ELSER is built-in and requires no external model deployment.

### Semantic search and vector search [semantic-search-vs-vector-search]

> [Semantic search](semantic-search.md) and vector search solve related problems but sit at different levels in {{es}}.

Reviewer: we've still got the slight confusion here flagged in a previous review: vector search is the technology, semantic search is the use case and semantic_text is a managed workflow for implementing vector search 

we shouldn't confuse the semantic search use case with our semantic_text managed workflow

**Vector search** is the underlying technology. You store embeddings in [`dense_vector`](vector/dense-vector.md) or [`sparse_vector`](vector/sparse-vector.md) fields and query them for similarity (for example with [`knn`](vector/knn.md)). You choose embedding models, field mappings, ingest pipelines, and query structure.

> **Semantic search** is how you implement meaning-based text search using managed workflows. Approaches such as [`semantic_text`](semantic-search/semantic-search-semantic-text.md), the [{{infer}} API](semantic-search/semantic-search-inference.md), or [ELSER ingest pipelines](semantic-search/semantic-search-elser-ingest-pipelines.md) generate embeddings and run similarity search for you. They use vector search under the hood.

Reviewer: > **Semantic search** is how you implement meaning-based text search using managed workflows.

again no, semantic search is a use case, not an implementation 

semantic search is not synonymous with managed workflows — semantic_text is synonymous with managed workflows

> | | Semantic search | Vector search |

Reviewer: again, we really shouldn't be comparing semantic search and vector search because they go hand in hand

one way or another, you'll be using vector search for your semantic search use case

what differs is whether you use semantic_text/managed workflows with EIS or you handle the embeddings and model deployment yourself

|--|-----------------|---------------|
| What you work with | Managed workflows and the `semantic_text` field type | Vector fields, models, and queries you configure directly |
| Embedding setup | Handled by the workflow (defaults or endpoint configuration) | You deploy models, build pipelines, or supply precomputed vectors |
| Typical use | Natural language search, quick setup, [hybrid search](hybrid-search.md) with full-text | Bring your own embeddings, custom models, or similarity beyond text (for example images) |
| Control | Less manual configuration | Full control over storage, models, and retrieval |

Choose semantic search when you want meaning-based matching with minimal setup. Choose vector search when you need direct control or already have embeddings. 

For a broader view of when each search approach fits your goals, refer to [Search approaches](search-approaches.md).

## Field types and queries [vector-queries-and-field-types]

> The table below matches the main vector field types to the [Query DSL](elasticsearch://reference/query-languages/querydsl.md) queries and [{{esql}}](elasticsearch://reference/query-languages/esql.md) tools you use with each.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can query vector fields using [Query DSL](elasticsearch://reference/query-languages/querydsl.md) or [{{esql}}](elasticsearch://reference/query-languages/esql.md) syntax. The following table explains how to work with each field type in these languages.
```

this is a little bit clearer that you're picking a language

Query DSL is the JSON request body for the `_search` API and related search endpoints. You describe match clauses, filters, scoring, and vector queries in nested objects.

> {{esql}} is a piped query language in {{es}}. You write a linear pipeline of commands and functions to read, filter, and score data instead of building the same logic as nested Query DSL JSON. Learn how to use [{{esql}} for search](/solutions/search/esql-for-search.md).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
{{esql}} is a piped query language in {{es}}. You write a linear pipeline of commands and functions to read, filter, and score data. Learn how to use [{{esql}} for search](/solutions/search/esql-for-search.md).
```

that clause is superfluous

> Supported types for {{esql}} change by version. Refer to [{{esql}} limitations](elasticsearch://reference/query-languages/esql/limitations.md) before relying on vector-related {{esql}} functions in production.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Not all {{esql}} vector functions are available for every field type in older versions. Refer to [{{esql}} limitations](elasticsearch://reference/query-languages/esql/limitations.md) to check support for your version.
```

Flips the framing from a vague, slightly negative positioning of "be careful" to "you might be missing features!"

## Combining search strategies [vector-search-combine-strategies]

You are not limited to a single retrieval style. Search applications can combine [traditional keyword search](elasticsearch://reference/query-languages/query-dsl/full-text-queries.md), [nearest neighbor vector search](elasticsearch://reference/query-languages/query-dsl/query-dsl-knn-query.md), [sparse learned retrieval](elasticsearch://reference/query-languages/query-dsl/query-dsl-sparse-vector-query.md), and [reranking](ranking/semantic-reranking.md) within the same workflow.

You can implement these combinations in one of two ways:

> - A single [`_search`](the-search-api.md) request built with [retrievers](retrievers-overview.md), where each retrieval stage is defined in the [Query DSL](elasticsearch://reference/query-languages/querydsl.md) JSON structure.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Use [retrievers](retrievers-overview.md) to configure multi-stage retrieval pipelines within a single `_search` call.
```

- probably unnecessary to link to Query DSL here too to minimize potential confusion
- the sentence was a bit meandering

> - A piped [{{esql}}](elasticsearch://reference/query-languages/esql.md) query that uses [`FORK`](elasticsearch://reference/query-languages/esql/commands/fork.md) to run retrieval branches in parallel and [`FUSE`](elasticsearch://reference/query-languages/esql/commands/fuse.md) to combine the results with [reciprocal rank fusion](elasticsearch://reference/elasticsearch/rest-apis/reciprocal-rank-fusion.md) (`RRF`) or weighted score combination (`LINEAR`).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Use an [{{esql}}](elasticsearch://reference/query-languages/esql.md) query that leverages [`FORK`](elasticsearch://reference/query-languages/esql/commands/fork.md) to run retrieval branches in parallel and [`FUSE`](elasticsearch://reference/query-languages/esql/commands/fuse.md) to combine the results using RRF or linear combination algorithms.
```

folks can dig into RRF if they click on the FUSE link so not need to have too many links here :)

The [Semantic search](semantic-search.md) section provides managed workflows that use vector search under the hood. These approaches handle embedding generation, chunking, and model management for you, making them the simplest way to get started.

- [Semantic search with `semantic_text`](semantic-search/semantic-search-semantic-text.md): Generate embeddings using the `semantic_text` field type with built-in defaults for chunking and model management.
- [Hybrid search with `semantic_text`](hybrid-semantic-text.md): Combine semantic understanding with keyword search for better relevance in real applications.
- [Semantic search with the Inference API](semantic-search/semantic-search-inference.md): Use custom or external embedding models and control how embeddings are generated.
- [Semantic search with ELSER](semantic-search/semantic-search-elser-ingest-pipelines.md): Use built-in semantic search with explainable results, without external models.
- [Using Cohere with Elasticsearch](semantic-search/cohere-es.md): Generate embeddings using Cohere models via the Inference API and combine vector, hybrid search, reranking, and RAG in a single workflow.

### Advanced tutorials

> These tutorials provide more direct or customizable approaches to working with vector search:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
These guides provide more direct or customizable approaches to working with vector search:
```

These aren't all tutorials so just making more generic
